# Daily Learning Log

## Date: 2025-11-25

### 🎯 Today's Focus

- [X] Explore AWS Management Console.
- [X] Working on IAM User.
- [X] Hands-on lab

### 📖 What I Learned

1. **SETTING OF IAM POLICIES INHERITANCE**

   - Let imagine in developer group we are going to attach policy to the group then the policy will apply to all group members.
   - Then if we have another group of operations they also will inherit the different policy attach to these group.
   - Then we have another User that does not belong to any group then we will create inline policy to the user then apply inline policy to the user.
   - Then if we have User that belong to both developer and operations group like audit team then both user will also inherit policy attach to the audit team .

2. **IAM POLICIES STRUCTURE**

   - Consists of -
    . Version: policy language version, always include number, so usually it's 2012-10-17.
    . Id: an identifier for the policy (optional).
    . Statement: one or more individual statements (required).

   - Statements consists of  -
    . Sid: an identifier for the statement (optional).
    . Effect: whether the the statement allow or denied access (Allow,Deny).  
    . Principal: account/user/role to which policy applied to
    . Action: is the list of API calls that will be either denied or allowed based on the effect.
    . Resources:  is a list of resources, to which the actions will be applied to.
    . Condition: condition for when this policy is in effect (optional).

3. **IAM POLICIES HAND-ON (IN DEPTH)**

   - If i use my user (IAM) to go into IAM console So my user has permission to do anything because it's an administrator.But what I'm going to do is that I'm going to the groups of admins and then I'm going to remove my user (Root) from the group, then user (Root) loses its permission on IAM account.
   - How do we make sure of this? Well, let's refresh this page. then you can see, now I see zero users and I get an access denied and it said that I don't have the permission to do iamListUsers. from that group.
   - Because I removed my user (Root) from the admin group, then I've lost permissions to look at users on the IAM account.
   - So to fix this So let's go into IAM (Root) and we're gonna go under users, find the User in here. then you can see that the User has zero policies
   - Then lets try to add the policies back So we can add permissions directly or create an inline policy.
   - So we are going to add permissions directly, And so again, we could add the user (Root) back to a group. Or we could attach policies directly to my user (Root).
   - And so the policy I'm going to attach is going to be IAMReadOnlyAccess. So this will allow my user to read anything on IAM, which is what we want.
   - Then click on add permission then the policies has been added.
   - Then in IAM account refresh the page And as you can see now, I can finally do my API call again and look at the user in my users category. So I can view users, I can view user groups, such as admin
   - Then lets try to create a group a developer group then click create group but access will be denied because I'm not allowed to actually create a group. I'm only given the read-only access on IAM (Root). And so therefore, because I have read-only access, I cannot create groups.
   - So next, I'm going to go into Root account under user groups, and I'm going to create a group. So this group is going to be called developers. And then I'm going to add the user in this group.
   - Then i am going to attach any policy to this group then click create group, So let's go into the admin group. And again, we're going to add users and re-add User into this group. then click add users.
   - So now if we go back to the user (Root), so let's go into IAM  (Root) and look at the users, So if we look at User as the user, we have three permission policies attached to my user. We have the administrator access that has been inherited from the group admin and the other two policies one was inherited from the developer group while the other was add directly.
   - * - means anything in AWS under json in policies if we look at the AdministatorAccess on root account we can see that the user have access to all AWS services. So it means we allow any action on any resource. And of course allowing any action on any resource is exactly the same thing as giving administrator access to someone.
   - If we have a look at another policy, for example, the IAMReadOnlyAccess that is attach to the User. So if we look at it, we see that IAM is authorized with Full: List and Limited: Read. And if I click on it, you can actually have a look at all the API calls that has been allowed as part of this policy, which is very handy. But if we look at how this has been actually defined, let's click on JSON.
   - And here we have the JSON document that shows how this has been defined. So the effect is allow, and then we list out the API calls that are being allowed. So we have this one, and then we have Get*. So when you have Get*, it says that anything that starts with Get and then has something after is authorized. For example, get users or get groups. Same for list. So we have a List*. So list users or list groups. So by using a star, we encompass and group many API calls together. So all this is allowed on Resource*. And so therefore, that summarizes what the read-only IAM access policy is made of. So this is very handy. ( Then went ahead to create policies ).
   - After creating the policies, then back to the user group we are going to delete the developer group because we don't need it select on the developer and then click on delete.
   - And then I'm going to go into my User (Root) and I'm going to just remove this IAMReadOnlyAccess that had attached directly. So now my User only belongs to the group admin and it has administrator access.
   - So if i go back to my IAM account everything is working perfectly.

4. **IAM USER PASSWORD POLICY**

   - Strong Passwords- Higher Security for the Account.
   - In AWS you can setup a password policy:
    . Set a minimum password length
    . Require specific character types:
      . Including uppercase letters
      . Lowercase
      . Numbers
      . Non-alphanumeric characters
    . Allow all IAM Users to change their passwords
    . Require users to change their password after sometime (password expiration)
    . Prevent password re-use
   - Multi Factor Authentication (MFA)
    . It is compulsory to setup MFA in AWS because users have access to your account and they can possibly do a lot of things, especially if they're administrators. They can change configuration, delete resources and other things.
    . You want to protect your Root accounts and IAM Users by using MFA method.
   - We can edit our password policy in Root account

5. **MFA DEVICES OPTIONS IN AWS**

   - Virtual MFA device:
     . Google Authenticator (phone only).
     . Authy (phone only).
     Support for multiple Token on a single device
   - Universal Second Factor (U2F) Security key
     . YubiKey by Yubico (3rd party) not from AWS.
     So this YubiKey supports multiple root and IAM users using a single security key.
   - Hardware Key Fob MFA Device provided by Gemalto (3rd party).
   - Hardware Key Fob MFA Device for AWS GovCloud (US) provided by SurePassID (3rd party).

6. **HOW CAN USERS ACCESS AWS**

   - To access AWS we have three options:
     . AWS Management Console (Protected by password + MFA).
     . AWS Command Line Interface (CLI): Protected by Access Keys.
     . AWS Software Developer Keys (SDK) - for code: Protected by Access Keys.
   - Access Keys are generated through AWS Console.
   - User manage their own Access Keys.
   - Access are secret just like password don't share them, So really make sure that you treat your access key ID just like your username, and your secret access key just like your password, you do not share them with other people.

7. **WHAT'S THE AWS CLI**

   - A tool that allow you to interact with AWS services using commands in your command-line shell.
   - Direct access to the public APIs of AWS services.
   - You can develop script to manage your resources.
   - It's an open-sourcehttps://github.com/aws/aws-cli.
   - Alternative to use AWS Management Console.

8. **WHAT'S THE AWS SDK**

   - AWS Software Developer kit (AWS SDK).
   - Language-specific APIs (set of libraries ).
   - Enable to access and manage AWS services programmatically.
   - Is not something we use in our terminal is what we embedded within our application.
   - It supports many different programming languages, such as JavaScript, Python, PHP.NET, Ruby, Java, Go, Node.js, C++, all of that's our programming languages. and Mobile SDK (Android, IOS,...).
   -IoT Devices SDK: (Embedded C, Arduino,...) and the IoT, so Internet of Things device SDK in case you're using some thermal sensors or bike locks that are connected, all these kinds of things.
   - Example: AWS CLI is built on AWS SDK for Python.

### 💻 Hands-on Practice

**CREATING OF POLICIES**

1. Then click create policy, and we have a visual editor or a JSON editor. So if you have JSON, you can just very   simply edit this and create your JSON document with this builder, which is very handy. Or you can use the visual editor.
2. Then select the visual and click on IAM and pick the policy you wanted to attach ListUser and GetUser then select on the resources you wanted to use it on then click next then we name the policy i.e MyIAMPermissions then will click create policy.
3. Then check the policy details. then to the User group.

**MFA SETUP**

- Select security credentials from my Root account left side bar then select Assign MFA then name the device name and select the security option you want which is MFA and run the process we can also remove the MFA setup.

**AWS CLI on Window**

- So we have to search for AWS CLI on browser and we are going to download it and run the istaller afer the installation then go and open the command line then run aws --version to make sure the AWS CLI is fully installed

# Code examples here
