# Daily Learning Log

## Date: 2025-12-3

### 🎯 Today's Focus

- [X] Continuation on Amazon S3
- [X] Hands-on lab

### 📖 What I Learned

1. **S3 Storage Classes Overview**

   - S3 Durability and Availability.
   - S3 Glacier

2. **S3 Storage Classes Hands-on**

   - So let's create a new bucket industry, then create it as the first bucket i created and then upload image to it.

   - So we can look at the properties of that object,and under storage class, I get the wide range of storage class that are for AWS objects. So we have S3 standard. and so on.

   - So what if we go with standard IA for example, and create an object there. So we're going there, and then we're going to save changes.

   - But what I can do is that I can also change the storage class if I wanted to. So I can go into properties and scroll down, and we can actually edit the storage class to do something different.

   - So let's go back into our buckets, and there under management, you can create lifecycle rules. And you can create a rule, and we'll call this one "DemoRule." And then you're going to say, "hey," apply to all objects in the buckets.

   - And then we can say, okay Transition current versions between storage classes. And you're saying, hey, you go to Standard-IA after, for example, 30 days. And then you go to Intelligent-Tiering after 60 days. And then you would go to Glacier-Flexible-Retrieval after 180 days, and so on. (And then cancel it).

3. **S3 Express One Zone**

   - So here's one more storage class, but I wanted to make a separate lecture for it because it's a bit different than the other ones.

4. **S3 Encryption**

   - So you might have one question on S3 encryption at the exam, so here is a high level review of what that means. The first one is server-side encryption, so it is by default whenever you create a bucket or whenever you upload an object, it will be encrypted. What is server-side encryption? Well, the user uploads an object into Amazon S3, and then that object when it arrives in the bucket is going to be encrypted by Amazon S3 for security purposes.

   - The idea is that the server is doing the encryption, and therefore we call this server-side encryption.

   - We have client-side encryption. This is when the user will actually take the file, will encrypt it before uploading it, so the lock is done by the user, and then put it in the bucket. And that's called client-side encryption. And both models exist in AWS, but by default you should know that server-side encryption is always on.

5. **IAM Access Analyzer for S3**

   - Well, this is a monitoring feature for your Amazon S3 buckets to ensure that only the intended people have access to your S3 buckets.

   - And the idea is that you can review this and say, okay, this is normal, this is expected, or this looks a bit as a security issue because I did not intend to share this bucket with these people, and therefore, you can take action. And this is powered by IAM Access Analyzer, which allows you to find out resources in your account that are shared with other entities.

6. **Shared Responsible Model for S3**

7. **AWS Snow Family Overview**

   - AWS Snowball:

     . So we have two kind of Snowball edge devices. One is called the Edge Storage Optimized, and the other one is called the Edge Compute Optimized.

     . The Snowball service is really just something that is used for data migrations and edge computing.

8. **AWS Snowball Family Hands-on**

   - So we're going to order a Snow family device, or at least go through the process of ordering one to see what are the options.

   - So first we have a job name. So this is my import job, and then you choose a job type. So do you want to import into Amazon S3. It's going to be a very good use case. So Amazon will ship a Snowball device to you and then you send it back to AWS. Or do you want to export, in which case you export data from Amazon S3 and it gets loaded into the Snowball device and then you receive it.

   - Or if you want to just do edge computing, you do local compute and storage only. So let's do import from Amazon S3.

   - And then we have Snow devices, so we can choose two of them. We can choose this one, the Snowball Edge Storage optimized with 210 terabytes, or the compute optimized device.

   - So next, you choose the pricing option. So on-demand per day pricing, the storage transfer, so S3 data transfer, and then the buckets that you want to transfer data back into.

   - Snow device has the right to write to our S3 buckets. And then the shipping address, so where you want the snow device to be shipped to, because you're going to receive it.

9. **AWS Snowball Edge Pricing**

   - From an exam perspective, I think we need to remember is that everything you have to pay for, except data into Amazon S3, which costs you $0 per gigabytes.

10. **Storage Gateway Overview**

    - Hybrid Cloud for Storage:

      . So we've seen Amazon S3 as a standalone service, but it is possible for you to use it in a hybrid cloud type of setting. So AWS wants you to bridge between your on-premises environment to AWS and that's called a hybrid cloud.

      . For exposing S3 data on-premises, you have to use something called a Storage Gateway.

    - What i need to know is that the Storage Gateway allows you to bridge whatever happens on-premises directly into the AWS Cloud.

    - So from a certified cloud petitioner perspective, the Storage Gateway is a way for you to bridge your file systems and your storage on-premises into the cloud to leverage best of both worlds.

11. **Amazon S3 Summary**

    - Bucket vs Object - So we know that buckets must have a global unique name, and it's tied to a specific region. And objects live within these buckets.

    - 

### 💻 Hands-on Practice

```code
# Code examples here
