# Daily Learning Log

## Date: 2025-12-6

### 🎯 Today's Focus

- [X] Other Compute Services:ECS,LAMBDA,BATCH,LIGHTSAIL
- [X] Hands-on lab

### 📖 What I Learned

### ECS SECTION

1. **DOCKER**

   - software development platform that allows you to run applications the same way, regardless of where they are run

2. **ECS, Fargate & ECR Overview**

   - Elastic Container Service(ECS) - and this is used to launch the docker containers.

   - Fargate - is a serverless compute engine for containers that works with both Amazon ECS and Amazon EKS. With Fargate, you no longer have to provision, configure, and scale clusters of virtual machines to run containers.

   - So before with ECS, we first created our EC2 instances, but with Fargate, we don't. But both services will allow you to run docker container on AWS.

   - For storing these docker images, so that it can be run on the AWS, you need to use a container registry.For this we can use ECR

   - ECR - Elastic Container Registry (ECR) is a fully managed Docker container registry that makes it easy for developers to store, manage, and deploy Docker container images.

3. **AMAZON Elastic Kubernetes Service(EKS)**

4. **Serverless Introduction**

   - List of Serverless:
     . Amazon S3
     . DynamoDB
     . Fargate
     . Lambda

5. **Lambda Overview**

   - Here is a very common use case of Lambda, which is to create a serverless thumbnail creation service. So say we have an S3 bucket and we add images in it, so our users are uploading a beach image into an S3 bucket. The S3 bucket will trigger a Lambda function once the image is uploaded, and that Lambda function will take that image and will change it to create a thumbnail. It will push the thumbnail back into Amazon S3. So a thumbnail is a smaller version of the image, or it will also push some metadata about the thumbnail into DynamoDB. That includes the image size, the image name, the creation dates, et cetera, et cetera.

   - Now, there's another very common use case for Lambda, which is to create a serverless CRON job. So CRON allows you to define a schedule, for example, every hour, every day, or every Monday, and based on that schedule to run a script. And by default, a CRON job is run on a Linux AMI.

   - And going into the CCP exam, you need to remember that Lambda pricing is based on calls and duration.

6. **Lambda Hands-on**

   - And so if you go in the Lambda console and you get one of these screens, just go into the URL and go to slash and go to slash begin because I really like this little UI to show you how Lambda is working first. It's just to show you a diagram.

   - So here, let's take our Node.js and click on Run. So it runs and says, "Hello from Lambda." Next we click on Lambda Responds to Events. So here the pretty cool thing is that we have access to different sources of event triggers that are going to trigger our Lambda function.

   - Next, let's click on Create a Function. And so we're going to use a blueprint and we're going to use the hello world. and I will choose Python. So it could be whatever Python version you want, but Python. And I'll call function name HelloWorld.

   - And now we have the execution role. So your Lambda function is going to be having execution role. This is similar to the role you would set on an EC2 instance, but this time it's for Lambda function. So we're going to create a new role with basic Lambda permissions.

   - So my function is now created, and as we can see, we have the code right here that's available to us. And so we have a function and it's saying hey, load this function. And then we have a handler and so on.

   - So what we can do is that we can actually test our function right here and we click on Test, and as you can see, it has succeeded and we get value1 as a result.

   - So the input JSON is in the bottom, this is our hello-world template and key1, value1, key2, value2, key3, value3 has been passed as a JSON to our Lambda function. And our Lambda function returned this log, and as you can see, it's successfully executed.

   - After removing one key and value and if i test it, it's going to fail. So I put this back in and I can test it again. So we can save our Lambda function  by click on save and we say this is our HelloWorldEvent and we save by clicking on save again, and now we have saved our test event, so now we can test it as many times as we want.

   - So we also have the option to monitor our Lambda function. So this is where you get invocations from CloudWatch, we know some statistics, so it takes a bit of time to populate, but if you run it and wait, you'll see some stuff here and you can click on View CloudWatch Logs. This is where you're going to get the logs of your function.

   - And so if I look at my log stream one, as we can see, we get the first time passed, so we get the value1 equals one and so on. And then we also get the error that happened at some point when I triggered it. And so this is cool because we can debug our functions directly from the CloudWatch logs.

   - Okay, then we get access to come to some configuration. So this is where you set the general configuration of your Lambda function, the memory, and you can set it to very large or very small, ephemeral storage, the timeout, so how long you want it to run before saying it should fail, and the execution role.

   - So this role, if you click on it, is the role that allows you to access CloudWatch. So if we look at it, this is the basic Lambda role execution. And if we look at what it does, and we click on the role, the permissions is around the CloudWatch Logs. And so this allows our Lambda function to write to CloudWatch Logs. And this is very handy because if we wanted to also interact with Amazon S3 and so on, we would just go ahead and change that role and add more permissions to that IAM role.

   - Okay, so let's cancel. So this is general configuration. As you can see, there's tons of configuration in the Lambda world, so I don't wanna go over this, but two things I wanna show you.

   - So first, permissions. So the role again is here and we get a role summary. So we can see that CloudWatch Logs is allowed and we have three actions allowed. We can do it by resource or by action.

   - And then under the triggers tab. So currently we have no triggers, but we can add a trigger, and this shows you all the sources of events that can be triggering a Lambda function. And i will cancel it.

7. **Amazon API Gateway Overview**

   - So this comes from the use case from an exam perspective of you wanting to build a server less HTTP API.

8. **Batch Overview**

9. **Lightsail Overview**

   - Amazon Lightsail is a bit of an oddball in AWS because it is kind of a stand-alone service.

   - Lightsail really is something that you wouldn't use today on your own but from an exam perspective if you see someone that has no cloud experience and need to get started quickly with a low and predictable pricing without configuring things much that will be Lightsail.

10. **Lightsail Hands-on**

    - So Lightsail, as you can see, looks nothing like AWS, it is a separate service because it doesn't have any kind of good integrations with AWS.

    - So let's get started with Lightsail. They need you to create an instance. And so say, where is this going to be. And so as you can see, you can change the region and the AZ from here for that instance.

    - So you can pick an instance image which would correspond to an AMI a but again, all these things are hidden from you in lightsail. And so for example, we can say okay, we want to use a blueprint such as a template, and we can use the OS only. This would be very similar to EC2, but we can go with App NOS for example. We can say okay,

    - So we can have an optional launch grid, which is an EC2 use data, we can change the SSH key pair if you wanted to. But you can see all these things are kind of hidden. They don't want you to modify these parameters well, right away.

    - We don't see the EC2 instance types,we just see some instances with a price indicated. I'm going to just pick  the one that it's in the free tier, and then you have to make sure you delete at the end. So it's going to be WordPress one, and it will create this instance.

    - So we can see here, no security groups, no networking, no EBS volumes, really, it's meant to be very, very simple.

    - So while this instance is pending, again, So you could create database and again, this is not RDS, this is lightsail.

    - You choose again, the region and the AZ you pick the database type. And then you can specify some credentials for the login, if you want to standard database or high availability, and then the price you're willing to pay. but don't create it.

    - Now let's look at our WordPress. So here, if I click on the instance, this actually gets me into an SSH terminal, into my EC2 instance. So I need to wait a little bit for it to boot up.

    - So we're not going to do any commands on the SSH. But as we can see a WordPress was deployed. And so I can click on it and view it and then we can connect using SSH again from the same thing.

    - But if we look at the public IP that is running,and open this in a new tab, then we're going to connect into our WordPress instance.

    - But the idea is that yes, Something is being created on our instance. And that was very, very easy. So that's it when you're done, please make sure to delete that instance. So you click on delete, and then delete the instance so that you don't incur any charges.

11. **Other Compute Summary**

### 💻 Hands-on Practice

```code
# Code examples here
