# Daily Learning Log

## Date: 2025-11-28

### 🎯 Today's Focus
- [X] AMAZON EC2
- [X] Security Groups & Classic Ports Overview. 
- [ ] Hands-on lab

### 📖 What I Learned
1. **EC2 INSTANCE TYPES - OVERVIEW**
   - 
   - Detail 2

2. **EC2 INSTANCE TYPES - GENERAL PURPOSE**

   - Great for a diversity of a workloads such as web servers or code repositories

   - Balance Between:
     . Compute
     . Memory
     . Networking

   - We'll be using general purpose instances. We'll be using the t2.micro, which is the free tier general purpose type of instance.

3. **EC2 INSTANCE TYPES - COMPUTE OPTIMIZED**

   - Great for compute an intensive tasks that require high performance processors:
     . Batch processing some data(workloads).
     . Media transcoding.
     . High performance web servers.
     . high performance computing (HPC).
     . Scientific Modeling & Machine Learning.
     . Dedicated Gaming Server.

   - So in terms of the names for the memory optimized instances, that's going to be the C series.

4. **EC2 INSTANCE TYPES - MEMORY OPTIMIZED**

   - Fast performance for workloads that process large data set in memory.

   - Use cases:
     . High performance for relational or non-relational databases
     . Distributed web scale cache store. So for ElastiCache, for example.
     . In memory databases that are optimized for business intelligence (BI).
     . Applications performing realtime processing of big unstructured data.

   - So in terms of the names for the memory optimized instances, that's going to be the R series because R stands for RAM. But there's also going to be X1, High Memory and Z1.

5. **EC2 INSTANCE TYPES - STORAGE OPTIMIZED**

   - Great for storage intensive tasks that require high, sequential read and write access to large data sets on local storage

   - Use cases:
     . high frequency online transaction processing (OLTP) systems.
     . Relational and NoSQL databases.
     . Cache for in-memory databases (for example Redis).
     . Data warehousing applications.
     . Distributed file system.

   - storage optimized instances in AWS. We'll start with a I or D or H1.

6. **EC2 INSTANCE TYPES - EXAMPLE**

   - A website to compare all the instances together, there's one that I really like. It's called ec2instances.info.

7. **INTRODUCTION TO SECURITY GROUPS**

   - Security groups are the fundamental of network security in AWS.

   - They control how traffic are allow in and out of our EC2 instances

    [ So here, let's take an example. We are on our computer, so we are on the public internet, and we're trying to access our EC2 instance from our computer. We are going to create a security group around our EC2 instance, that is the firewall that is around it ].

    [ And then this security group is going to have rules. And these rules are going to say whether or not some inbound traffic, so from the outside into the EC2 instance is allowed ].

    [ And also if the EC2 instance can perform some outbound traffic, so to talk from where it is into the internet ].

   - Security Groups only contain allow rules
   - Security Groups rules can reference by IP or by security groups

   **Security Groups**
   - Deeper Dive
     . SEcurity groups are acting as"Firewall" on EC2 instances.

     - They Regulates:
       . Access to ports
       . Authorized IP ranges - IPv4 and IPv6 (Two types of IP on the internet)
       . Control of Inbound Network (From other to instances)
       . Control of Outbound Network (From instance to other)

     - And when we look at security group rules, they will look just like this. So there will be the type, the protocol, so TCP, the port allowing it, so where the traffic can go through on the instance, and the source, which represents an IP address range. And 0.0.0.0/0 means everything. And this here means just one IP.

   - Diagram:
     . So we have our EC2 instance, and it has one security group attached to it that has inbound rules and outbound rules, so I've separated them onto this diagram. So our computer is going to be authorized on, say, port 22, so the traffic can go through from our computer to the EC2 instance. But someone else's computer that's not using my IP address because they don't live where I live, then if they try to access our EC2 instance, they will not get through it because the firewall is going to block it, and it will be a timeout.

     . Then for the outbound rules, by default, our EC2 instance for any security group is going to be by default allowing any traffic out of it. So our EC2 instance, if it tries to access a website and initiate a connection, it is going to be allowed by the security group. So this is the basics of how the firewall works.

   - Good To Know:
     . Can be attached to multiple instances
     . Locked down to a region or VPC combination ( So if you switch to another region, you have to create a new security group, or if you create another VPC ).
     . Don't live "Outside" the EC2 - If traffic is blocked the EC2 instance won't see it.
     . It's good to maintain one separate security group for SSH access.
     . If your application is not accessible (Timeout), then it's a security group issue.
     . If your application gives a "Connection Refused" error, then it's an application error or it's not launched.
     . By default, all inbound traffic is blocked.
     . All outbound traffic is authorized.

   - Referencing Other Security Group
     - Diagram:
       . [ how to reference security groups from other security groups. So let me explain things. So we have an EC2 instance, and it has a security group, what I call group number one. And the inbound rules is basically saying, I'm authorizing security group number one inbound and security group number two. So why would we even do this? Well, if we launch another EC2 instance and it has security group two attached to it, well, by using the security group run rule that we just set up, we basically allow our EC2 instance to go connect straight through on the port we decided onto our first EC2 instance. Similarly, if we have another EC2 instance with a security group one attached well, we've also authorized this one to communicate straight back to our instances. And so regardless of the IP of our EC2 instances, because they have the right security group attached to them, they're able to communicate straight through to other instances. And that's awesome because it doesn't make you think about IPs all the time ].

8. **CLASSIC PORTS TO KNOW**
   - 22 = SSH(Secure Shell) - Log into a linux instance.
   - 21 = FTP(File Transfer Protocol) - Upload files into a file share.
   - 22 = SFTP(SEcure File Transfer Protocol) - Upload file using SSH.
   - 80 = HTTP - Access unsecured websites.
   - 443 = HTTPS -Access secured websites.
   - 3389 = RDP(Remote Desktop Protocol) - log into a Windows instances.

9. **SECURITY GROUPS HANDS-ON**
   - On my instance created page on the left hand side i am going to click on security group.
   - EC2 instance can have many security groups attached to it. So it can attach one but two or three if you want maybe five security groups and the rules will just add on to each other. And also this security group we have created from default so for example, this launch wizard one can be attached to other EC2 instances. Okay, so you can attach as many security groups as you want as well as as many EC2 instances you want to one security group.

10. **HOW TO SSH INTO EC2 INSTANCE**
    - On Linux/Mac OS X
    - SSH is one of the most important function. it allow you to control a remote machine, all using the command line.
    
    - AFter moving my downloaded .pem into a folder, So next, what I'm going to do is that I am going to go in my EC2 instance overview page and find my first instance.

    - So we're going to open a remote terminal into it. And for this, I need to get the public IPv4 address, so I can copy this, and I will use it later. The other thing I need to do is to look at the security of my instance.
   ### 💻 Hands-on Practice
```code
# Code examples here
