# Daily Learning Log

## Date: 2025-12-4

### 🎯 Today's Focus

- [ ] DATABASE AND ANALYTICS
- [ ] Topic 2  
- [ ] Hands-on lab

### 📖 What I Learned

1. **Database introduction**

   - So databases are used to store data in a structured way, and there are two main types of databases that you should be aware of from an AWS perspective:

     . Relational database
     . Non-Relational database

2. **AMAZON RDS Overview**

   - So RDS is a managed relational database service that allows you to create relational databases in the cloud. So it supports multiple database engines, including MySQL, PostgreSQL, MariaDB, Oracle, SQL Server, and Amazon's own database engine called Aurora.

   - RDS automates time-consuming tasks such as database provisioning, patching, backup, recovery, and scaling, allowing you to focus on your applications rather than database administration.

3. **AMAZON AURORA Overview**

   - Aurora - is a proprietary technology from AWS and is cloud-optimized.

   - So Amazon Aurora is a relational database engine that is fully managed by AWS and is compatible with MySQL and PostgreSQL. Aurora is designed to provide high performance, scalability, and availability for database workloads.

   - Aurora automatically handles tasks such as backups, software patching, monitoring, and scaling, allowing you to focus on your applications rather than database administration.

   - Aurora also offers features such as read replicas for improved read performance, multi-AZ deployments for high availability, and serverless configurations for automatic scaling based on demand.

   - - So, from an exam perspective, RDS and Aurora are going to be the two ways for you to create relational databases on AWS. They're both managed and Aurora is going to be more cloud-native, whereas RDS is going to be running the technologies you know directly as a managed service.

4. **RDS Hands-on**

   - So let's go ahead and create our first database in RDS. but we're going to see the general idea of RDS and how it works. So, on the left hand side, I will go under Databases and I will create a database. So here, we have the interface. And so we have a full configuration and an easy create. So an easy create is to use recommended best-practice configurations, whereas the standard create allows you to just customize everything. I will use a standard create

   - So, in this demo, we're going to launch a very simple managed MySQL database using RDS, but we can see that there is a lot of options available to us. We'll use the MySQL Community, and then we'll use the latest version that is recommended.

   - We have the Production template, the Dev/Test template, or the Free Tier template, So if we go into the free tier, because we wanna stay within the free tier. Let's scroll down. For the DB identifier, I will use database-1. This is fine. Here, there is a master username. So admin is great. And then, the password, I will enter password twice.

   - The database class is now a burst able class of T2 micro. Well, that's the only one I can actually enter here because I went with the Free Tier setting.

   - We have some settings around storage. We can enable 20 gigabytes of gp2 SSD storage, and then we can have storage autoscaling. In case we are having more storage than 20 gigabytes, it will automatically increase the storage for us with a maximum of one terabyte, 1,000 gigabytes in here.

   - Availability and durability, for now, we will not go over these settings. Connectivity, so where do we want to launch the database? So we specify a virtual private cloud, or a VPC, as well as a subnet group. Do we want to have public access to our database? Yes or no? Well, you need to specify yes if you want to be able to connect to your database from your computer if you don't have direct connectivity into AWS, which should be the case for you, so we'll keep it as yes public access.

   - Then, we should assign some security group. So you can create a new security group. I'll call it demo-database-rds. And the AZ is going to be no preference. This is fine. And database port is 3306. Excellent. Now, how do we want to authenticate the database? Using password or password and IAM or password and Kerberos. We'll keep it very simple and use it with password authentication. And we will not go over any additional configuration for now.

   - So we'll create this database. So it took a few minutes, but now my database is created.

   - Other things you can do is that you can take a snapshot of your database, and this snapshot will allow you, for example, to restore the database into another one. So let's do it,then wait till my database is available and then under Action, so i will click Take Snapshots and name it demo-snapshot, and we'll take the snapshot.

   - So my snapshot is now available, and what I can do is do Action, Restore Snapshot, and this would allow me to create a new database out of this snapshot.

   - And the reason why I would do so is that, for example, you wanted to create a bigger database or create a copy of the database and so on, or create a different settings for your database. Then, restoring a snapshot would be the way to do it. So I'm going to cancel this. Other things you can do with your snapshot is to copy it. So you can copy it to a different region.

   - And this would be extremely helpful if you wanted to restore the database into another region of AWS, for example, for disaster recovery. So yet another very handy feature.

   - Another thing you can do is share the snapshot. And sharing the snapshot allows you to share with other accounts so they can restore their database directly from your snapshot.

   - So just to finish this hands-on, let's delete this snapshot, and then we're also going to delete this database by doing Action, Delete, and then you don't want to create a final snapshot, you do not want to retain automated backups, and you acknowledge that everything will be deleted, then you type delete me, and you're good to go.

### 💻 Hands-on Practice

```code
# Code examples here
