# Daily Learning Log

## Date: 2025-11-24

### 🎯 Today's Focus

- [X] IAM Users, Groups, Roles, and Policies
- [X] Explore AWS Management Console  
- [X] Hands-on lab

### 📖 What I Learned

1. **IAM USERS, GROUP, ROLE AND POLICIES**

   - Diagram:
         ```plaintext
         +----------------------+----------------------+
         |      IAM Users      |      IAM Roles      |
         +----------------------+----------------------+
         | Individual identities| Set of permissions  |
         | with specific       | that define what    |
         | permission          | actions are allowed |
         |                     | and denied by an    |
         |                     | entity in AWS       |
         +----------------------+----------------------+
         ```

   - IAM - Identity and Access Management, Global service

   - Used to manage access to AWS services and resources securely

   - IAM Users - Individual identities with specific permission

   - IAM Role - Set of permissions that define what actions are allowed and denied by an entity in AWS

   - IAM Groups - Collections of users with shared permissions

   - Users are the people within my organization and they can be grouped

   - User doesn't have to belong to a group, and user can belong to multiple groups

   - Group only contain users, not other group.

   - Diagram:

       ```plaintext
       +------------------+
       |      Group       |
       | +--------------+ |
       | |    User 1    | |
       | +--------------+ |
       | +--------------+ |
       | |    User 2    | |
       | +--------------+ |
       +------------------+
       ```

2. **IAM PERMISSION**

   - Policies are JSON documents that define permissions

   - These policies define the permission given to the users

   - We created user and group so that they can have allow them to some services on AWS and we give user permission  (least privilege principle) based on what they need.

3. **CREATING IAM USERS**

   - In the root account search for IAM and  click on create user then give it name and select provide user access to AWS then also select the option of i want to create IAM user.

   - If i am creating for user(client) i will select Autogenerated password and also select Users must create password at the next login but if i am creating it for myself i will just select custom password

   - Then we have to add permission to our users we can add it directly or we can add it by creating user group, then select add user to a group

   - Then we name our group Admin and select AdministratorAccess then we create the group and add our user to the admin group then click on next then add tags if you want but is optional then create the user group

   - Then we can Email signin the user or Download the csv file, but for now i have to click return to users list to have a look at everything then click continue.

   - Then check out the permission policies under user and the group the user will inherit the permission given to the user group created

   - Then on our dashboard we have to signin with our User(Username), under AWS account we can copy our IAM URL or create Alias with (aws-username-v3) then create alias

   - Then login to my IAM account with the url.

   - Then turn on multi-session support it works for using multi browser session at the same time.

   - Diagram:
         ```plaintext
         +----------------------+
         |      IAM User       |
         +----------------------+
         | Username: user1     |
         | Permissions:        |
         | - S3 Access         |
         | - EC2 Access        |
         +----------------------+
         ```

4. **HOW TO ADD TAGS IN AWS**

   - Tags are key value pairs that help to identify AWS resources.

   - Tags can be added during resource creation or later.

   - Example:
       - KEY: Environment, VALUE: Production

   - KEY (Department) will be the title of the user while the value will the work the user will hold in the user group (Engineering) under the review and create.

### 💻 Hands-on Practice

```Using IAM Users
# Code examples here
